# Learn JavaScript

## A hige-level definition

JavaScript is a scripting or programming language that allows you to implement complex features on web pages — every time a web page does more than just sit there and display static information for you to look at — displaying timely content updates, interactive maps, animated 2D/3D graphics, scrolling video jukeboxes, etc. — you can bet that JavaScript is probably involved.

## Using of API in javascript

APIs are ready-made sets of code building blocks that allow a developer to implement programs that would otherwise be hard or impossible to implement. They do the same thing for programming that ready-made furniture kits do for home building — it is much easier to take ready-cut panels and screw them together to make a bookshelf than it is to work out the design yourself, go and find the correct wood, cut all the panels to the right size and shape, find the correct-sized screws, and  _then_  put them together to make a bookshelf.

**Browser APIs**  are built into your web browser, and are able to expose data from the surrounding computer environment, or do useful complex things. For example:

-   The  [`DOM (Document Object Model) API`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model)  allows you to manipulate HTML and CSS, creating, removing and changing HTML, dynamically applying new styles to your page, etc.
-   The  [`Geolocation API`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Geolocation)  retrieves geographical information. This is how [Google Maps](https://www.google.com/maps)  is able to find your location and plot it on a map.
-   The  [`Canvas`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Canvas_API)  and  [`WebGL`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebGL_API)  APIs allow you to create animated 2D and 3D graphics. People are doing some amazing things using these web technologies.
-   [Audio and Video APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/Audio_and_video_delivery)  like  [`HTMLMediaElement`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLMediaElement)  and  [`WebRTC`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebRTC_API)  allow you to do really interesting things with multimedia, such as play audio and video right in a web page, or grab video from your web camera and display it on someone else's.

**Third party APIs** are not built into the browser by default, and you generally have to grab their code and information from somewhere on the Web.

## Server-side versus client-side code

*Client-side* code is code that is run on the user's computer — when a web page is viewed, the page's client-side code is downloaded, then run and displayed by the browser. In this module we are explicitly talking about  **client-side JavaScript**.

*Server-side* code on the other hand is run on the server, then its results are downloaded and displayed in the browser. Examples of popular server-side web languages include PHP, Python, Ruby, ASP.NET, and even JavaScript! JavaScript can also be used as a server-side language, for example in the popular Node.js environment.

## Dynamic versus static code

The word  **dynamic**  is used to describe both client-side JavaScript, and server-side languages — it refers to the ability to update the display of a web page/app to show different things in different circumstances, generating new content as required. 

Server-side code dynamically generates new content on the server, e.g. pulling data from a database, whereas client-side JavaScript dynamically generates new content inside the browser on the client, e.g. creating a new HTML table, filling it with data requested from the server, then displaying the table in a web page shown to the user. 

The meaning is slightly different in the two contexts, but related, and both approaches (server-side and client-side) usually work together.

A web page with no dynamically updating content is referred to as  **static**  — it just shows the same content all the time.

## How do you add JavaScript to your page?

### External

#### Inside \<head> element
```js
<head>
	<script src="/js/script_file.js" />
</head>
```
#### Inside \<body> element
```js
<body>
	<h1>Hello World!</h1>
	<p>Some paragraphs...</p>

	<!-- Scripts -->
	<script src="/js/script_file.js" />
</body>
```

### Internal

#### Inside \<head> element
```js
<head>
	<script>
		var heading1 = document.getElementById("heading1");
		heading1.textContent = "Hello World";
	</script>
</head>
```
#### Inside \<body> element
```js
<body>
	<h1 id="heading1">Hello World!</h1>
	<p>Some paragraphs...</p>

	<!-- Scripts -->
	<script>
		var heading1 = document.getElementById("heading1");
		heading1.textContent = "Hello World";
	</script>
</body>
```

### Inline

```js
<body>
	<h1 id="heading1">Hello World!</h1>
	<input type="text" id="headingInput" value="Hello World!" />
	<button onclick="document.getElementById('heading1').textContent = document.getElementById('headingInput').value;"></button>
</body>
```

## Script loading strategies

A common problem is that all the HTML on a page is loaded in the order in which it appears. If you are using JavaScript to manipulate elements on the page, your code won't work if the JavaScript is loaded and parsed before the HTML you are trying to do something to.

### Ways to solve it

1. Add the script at the end of the page
	- The problem with this solution is that loading/parsing of the script is completely blocked until the HTML DOM has been loaded. On larger sites with lots of JavaScript, this can cause a major performance issue, slowing down your site.
2. Use *async and defer*
	- Scripts loaded using the `async` attribute will download the script without blocking the page while the script is being fetched. However, once the download is complete, the script will execute, which blocks the page from rendering.
	- Scripts loaded with the `defer` attribute will load in the order they appear on the page. They won't run until the page content has all loaded, which is useful if your scripts depend on the DOM being in place.

## Comments

### Single-line comments

```js
// i am a comment
```

### Multi-line comments

```js
/*
	i am also
	a comment
*/
```