# Functions — reusable blocks of code

Another essential concept in coding is functions, which allow you to store a piece of code that does a single task inside a defined block, and then call that code whenever you need it using a single short command — rather than having to type out the same code multiple times. In this article we'll explore fundamental concepts behind functions such as basic syntax, how to invoke and define them, scope, and parameters.

## Where do I find functions?

In JavaScript, you'll find functions everywhere. In fact, we've been using functions all the way through the course so far; we've just not been talking about them very much. 

Pretty much anytime you make use of a JavaScript structure that features a pair of parentheses — `()` — and you're not using a common built-in language structure like a `for loop`, `while or do...while loop`, or `if...else` statement, you are making use of a function.

```js
const myText = "I am a string";
const newString = myText.replace("string", "sausage");
console.log(newString);
// the replace() string function takes a source string,
// and a target string and replaces the source string,
// with the target string, and returns the newly formed string
```

```js
const myArray = ["I", "love", "chocolate", "frogs"];
const madeAString = myArray.join(" ");
console.log(madeAString);
// the join() function takes an array, joins
// all the array items together into a single
// string, and returns this new string
```

```js
const myNumber = Math.random();
// the random() function generates a random number between
// 0 and up to but not including 1, and returns that number
```

## Invoking functions

You are probably clear on this by now, but just in case, to actually use a function after it has been defined, you've got to run — or invoke — it. This is done by including the name of the function in the code somewhere, followed by parentheses.

```js
function myFunction() {
  alert("hello");
}

myFunction();
// calls the function once
```

## Function parameters

Some functions require parameters to be specified when you are invoking them — these are values that need to be included inside the function parentheses, which it needs to do its job properly.

  **Note:** Parameters are sometimes called arguments, properties, or even attributes.

As an example, the browser's built-in Math.random() function doesn't require any parameters. 

```js
const myNumber = Math.random();
```

The browser's built-in string replace() function however needs two parameters — the substring to find in the main string, and the substring to replace that string with:

```js
const myText = "I am a string";
const newString = myText.replace("string", "sausage");
```

### Optional parameters

Sometimes parameters are *optional* — you don't have to specify them. `If you don't, the function will generally adopt some kind of default behavior.` As an example, the array join() function's parameter is optional:

```js
const myArray = ["I", "love", "chocolate", "frogs"];
const madeAString = myArray.join(" ");
console.log(madeAString);
// returns 'I love chocolate frogs'

const madeAnotherString = myArray.join();
console.log(madeAnotherString);
// returns 'I,love,chocolate,frogs'
```

If no parameter is included to specify a joining/delimiting character, a comma is used by default.

### Default parameters

If you're writing a function and want to support optional parameters, you can specify default values by adding `=` after the name of the parameter, followed by the default value:

```js
function hello(name = "Chris") {
  console.log(`Hello ${name}!`);
}

hello("Ari"); // Hello Ari!
hello(); // Hello Chris!
```

## Anonymous functions and arrow functions

So far we have just created a function like so:

```js
function myFunction() {
  alert("hello");
}
```

But you can also create a function that doesn't have a name:


```js
(function () {
  alert("hello");
});

```

This is called an **anonymous function**, because it has no name. `You'll often see anonymous functions when a function expects to receive another function as a parameter.` In this case the function parameter is often passed as an anonymous function.

### Anonymous function example

For example, let's say you want to run some code when the user types into a text box. To do this you can call the `addEventListener()` function of the text box. 

This function expects you to pass it (at least) two parameters:

- the name of the event to listen for, which in this case is keydown
- a function to run when the event happens.

When the user presses a key, the browser will call the function you provided, `and will pass it a parameter containing information about this event`, including the particular key that the user pressed:

```js
function logKey(event) {
  console.log(`You pressed "${event.key}".`);
}

textBox.addEventListener("keydown", logKey);
```

Instead of defining a separate logKey() function, you can pass an anonymous function into `addEventListener()`:

```js
textBox.addEventListener("keydown", function (event) {
  console.log(`You pressed "${event.key}".`);
});
```

### Arrow functions

If you pass an anonymous function like this, there's an alternative form you can use, called an arrow function. Instead of `function(event)`, you write `(event) =>`:

```js
textBox.addEventListener("keydown", (event) => {
  console.log(`You pressed "${event.key}".`);
});
```

If the function only takes one parameter, you can omit the brackets around the parameter:

```js
textBox.addEventListener("keydown", event => {
  console.log(`You pressed "${event.key}".`);
});
```

Finally, if your function contains only one line that's a `return` statement, you can also omit the braces and the `return` keyword, and implicitly return the expression.

In the following example we're using the `map()` method of Array to double every value in the original array:

```js
const originals = [1, 2, 3];

const doubled = originals.map(item => item * 2);

console.log(doubled); // [2, 4, 6]
```

In the example above, item => item * 2 is the arrow function equivalent of:

```js
function doubleItem(item) {
  return item * 2;
}
```

**Note:** There are some subtle differences between arrow functions and normal functions. They're outside the scope of this introductory guide, and are unlikely to make a difference in the cases we've discussed here. To learn more, see the [arrow function reference documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions).

## Function return values

Return values are just what they sound like — the values that a function returns when it completes. You've already met return values several times, although you may not have thought about them explicitly.

```js
const myText = "The weather is cold";
const newString = myText.replace("cold", "warm");
console.log(newString); // Should print "The weather is warm"
// the replace() string function takes a string,
// replaces one substring with another, and returns
// a new string with the replacement made
```

When the function completes (finishes running), it returns a value, which is a new string with the replacement made. In the code above, the result of this return value is saved in the variable `newString`.

If you look at the [`replace()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/replace) function MDN reference page, you'll see a section called `return value`. It is very useful to know and understand what values are returned by functions, so we try to include this information wherever possible.

Some functions don't return any value. (In these cases, our reference pages list the return value as `void` or `undefined`.) 

`Generally, a return value is used where the function is an intermediate step in a calculation of some kind.` You want to get to a final result, which involves some values that need to be calculated by a function. After the function calculates the value, it can return the result so it can be stored in a variable; and you can use this variable in the next stage of the calculation.

### Using return values in your own functions

To return a value from a custom function, you need to use the return keyword.

```js
function random(number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * number);
}
```

or

```js
function random(number) {
  const result = Math.floor(Math.random() * number);
  return result;
}
```

We are returning the result of the calculation `Math.floor(Math.random() * number)` each time the function is called. 
*`This return value appears at the point the function was called, and the code continues.`*

So when you execute the following:

```js
Rect(random(WIDTH), random(HEIGHT));
```

If the random() calls return the values 500 and 200, the line would actually be run as if it were this:

```js
Rect(500, 200);
```

The function calls on the line are run first, and their return values are substituted for the function calls, before the line itself is then executed.

## [Function scope and conflicts](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions#function_scope_and_conflicts)
## [Build your own function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Build_your_own_function)