# JavaScript modules

## Basic example structure

In our first example (see [basic-modules](https://github.com/mdn/js-examples/tree/master/module-examples/basic-modules)) we have a file structure as follows:

```
index.html
main.js
modules/
    canvas.js
    square.js
```

## Exporting module features

The first thing you do to get access to module features is export them. This is done using the `export` statement.

The easiest way to use it is to place it in front of any items you want exported out of the module, for example:

```JS
export const name = "square";

export function draw(ctx, length, x, y, color) {
  ctx.fillStyle = color;
  ctx.fillRect(x, y, length, length);

  return { length, x, y, color };
}
```

You can export `functions`, `var`, `let`, `const`, and — as we'll see later — `classes`. They need to be top-level items; you can't use `export` inside a function, for example.

A more convenient way of exporting all the items you want to export is to use a single export statement at the end of your module file, followed by a comma-separated list of the features you want to export wrapped in curly braces. For example:

```JS
export { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter };
```

## Importing features into your script

Once you've exported some features out of your module, you need to import them into your script to be able to use them. The simplest way to do this is as follows:

```JS
import { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter } from "./modules/square.js";
```

- You use the `import` statement,
- followed by a comma-separated list of the features you want to import wrapped in curly braces,
- followed by the keyword from, 
- followed by the module specifier.

Once you've imported the features into your script, you can use them just like they were defined inside the same file.

### Note

`The *module specifier* provides a string that the JavaScript environment can resolve to a path to the module file.` In a browser, this could be a path relative to the site root, which for our `basic-modules` example would be `/js-examples/module-examples/basic-modules`. 

However, here we are instead using the dot (`.`) syntax to mean *"the current location"*, followed by the relative path to the file we are trying to find. This is much better than writing out the entire absolute path each time, as relative paths are shorter and make the URL portable — the example will still work if you move it to a different location in the site hierarchy.

So for example:

```BASH
/js-examples/module-examples/basic-modules/modules/square.js
```

becomes

```BASH
./modules/square.js
```

## Applying the module to your HTML

Now we just need to apply the main.js module to our HTML page. This is very similar to how we apply a regular script to a page, with a few notable differences.

First of all, you need to include `type="module"` in the `<script>` element, to declare this script as a module. To import the `main.js` script, we use this:

```HTML
<script type="module" src="main.js"></script>
```

You can also embed the module's script directly into the HTML file by placing the JavaScript code within the body of the `<script>` element:

```HTML
<script type="module">
  /* JavaScript module code here */
</script>
```

You can only use `import` and `export` statements inside *modules*, not regular scripts.

## Default exports versus named exports

The functionality we've exported so far has been comprised of `named exports` — each item (be it a function, const, etc.) has been referred to by its name upon export, and that name has been used to refer to it on import as well.

There is also a type of export called the `default export` — this is designed to make it easy to have a default function provided by a module.

Let's look at an example as we explain how it works. In our `basic-modules` `square.js` you can find a function called `randomSquare()` that creates a square with a random color, size, and position. We want to export this as our default, so at the bottom of the file we write this:

```js
export default randomSquare;
```

`Note the lack of curly braces.`

We could instead prepend export default onto the function and define it as an anonymous function, like this:

```JS
export default function (ctx) {
  // …
}
```

Over in our main.js file, we import the default function using this line:

```JS
import randomSquare from "./modules/square.js";
```

Again, note the lack of curly braces. This is because there is only one default export allowed per module, and we know that randomSquare is it. The above line is basically shorthand for:

```JS
import { default as randomSquare } from "./modules/square.js";
```

## Renaming imports and exports

Inside your `import` and `export` statement's curly braces, you can use the keyword `as` along with a new feature name, to change the identifying name you will use for a feature inside the top-level module.

So for example, both of the following would do the same job, albeit in a slightly different way:

```JS
// inside module.js
export { function1 as newFunctionName, function2 as anotherNewFunctionName };

// inside main.js
import { newFunctionName, anotherNewFunctionName } from "./modules/module.js";
```

```JS
// inside module.js
export { function1, function2 };

// inside main.js
import {
  function1 as newFunctionName,
  function2 as anotherNewFunctionName,
} from "./modules/module.js";
```

Let's look at a real example. In our [renaming](https://github.com/mdn/js-examples/tree/master/module-examples/renaming) directory you'll see the same module system as in the previous example, except that we've added `circle.js` and `triangle.js` modules to draw and report on circles and triangles.

Inside each of these modules, we've got features with the same names being exported, and therefore each has the same export statement at the bottom:

```JS
export { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter };
```

When importing these into main.js, if we tried to use

```JS
import { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter } from "./modules/square.js";
import { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter } from "./modules/circle.js";
import { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter } from "./modules/triangle.js";
```

The browser would throw an error such as "SyntaxError: redeclaration of import name" (Firefox).

Instead we need to rename the imports so that they are unique:

```JS
import {
  name as squareName,
  draw as drawSquare,
  reportArea as reportSquareArea,
  reportPerimeter as reportSquarePerimeter,
} from "./modules/square.js";

import {
  name as circleName,
  draw as drawCircle,
  reportArea as reportCircleArea,
  reportPerimeter as reportCirclePerimeter,
} from "./modules/circle.js";

import {
  name as triangleName,
  draw as drawTriangle,
  reportArea as reportTriangleArea,
  reportPerimeter as reportTrianglePerimeter,
} from "./modules/triangle.js";
```

Note that you could solve the problem in the module files instead, e.g.

```JS
// in square.js
export {
  name as squareName,
  draw as drawSquare,
  reportArea as reportSquareArea,
  reportPerimeter as reportSquarePerimeter,
};
```

```JS
// in main.js
import {
  squareName,
  drawSquare,
  reportSquareArea,
  reportSquarePerimeter,
} from "./modules/square.js";
```

And it would work just the same. What style you use is up to you, however it arguably makes more sense to leave your module code alone, and make the changes in the imports. This especially makes sense when you are importing from third party modules that you don't have any control over.

### Creating a module object

The above method works OK, but it's a little messy and long-winded. An even better solution is to import each module's features inside a module object. The following syntax form does that:

```JS
import * as Module from "./modules/module.js";
```

This grabs all the exports available inside module.js, and makes them available as members of an object Module, effectively giving it its own namespace. So for example:

```JS
Module.function1();
Module.function2();
```

Again, let's look at a real example. If you go to our module-objects directory, you'll see the same example again, but rewritten to take advantage of this new syntax. In the modules, the exports are all in the following simple form:

```JS
export { name, draw, reportArea, reportPerimeter };
```

The imports on the other hand look like this:

```JS
import * as Canvas from "./modules/canvas.js";

import * as Square from "./modules/square.js";
import * as Circle from "./modules/circle.js";
import * as Triangle from "./modules/triangle.js";
```

In each case, you can now access the module's imports underneath the specified object name, for example:

```JS
const square1 = Square.draw(myCanvas.ctx, 50, 50, 100, "blue");

Square.reportArea(square1.length, reportList);
Square.reportPerimeter(square1.length, reportList);
```

So you can now write the code just the same as before (as long as you include the object names where needed), and the imports are much neater.