## Variables

You can declare a variable in two ways:

-   With the keyword  **var**. For example,  `var x = 42`.
-   With the keyword  **const**  or  **let**. For example,  `let y = 13`.

A JavaScript identifier usually starts with a letter, underscore (`_`), or dollar sign (`$`). Subsequent characters can also be digits (`0` – `9`)

- variable_one
- VaraibleTwo
- varaibleThree

### Declaration and Initialization

In a statement like `let x = 42`, the `let x` part is called a _declaration_, and the `= 42` part is called an _initializer_. The declaration allows the variable to be accessed later in code without throwing a [`ReferenceError`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/ReferenceError), while the initializer assigns a value to the variable. 

In `var` and `let` declarations, the initializer is optional. If a variable is declared without an initializer, it is assigned the value [`undefined`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/undefined).

`const`  declarations always need an initializer, because they forbid any kind of assignment after declaration, and implicitly initializing it with  `undefined`  is likely a programmer mistake.

`const`  only prevents  _re-assignments_, but doesn't prevent  _mutations_. The properties of objects assigned to constants are not protected, so the following statement is executed without problems.

```js
const MY_ARRAY = ["HTML", "CSS"];
MY_ARRAY.push("JAVASCRIPT");
console.log(MY_ARRAY); // ['HTML', 'CSS', 'JAVASCRIPT'];
```

### When to use const and when to use let

If you can't do as much with  `const`  as you can with  `let`, why would you prefer to use it rather than  `let`? In fact  `const`  is very useful. If you use  `const`  to name a value, it tells anyone looking at your code that this name will never be assigned to a different value. Any time they see this name, they will know what it refers to.

_Use  `const`  when you can, and use  `let`  when you have to._

### Variable scope

A variable may belong to one of the following scopes:

-   **Global scope**: The default scope for all code running in script mode.
-   **Function scope**: The scope created with a  function.
-   **Block scope**: The scope created with a pair of curly braces.

When you declare a variable outside of any function, it is called a  _global_  variable, because it is available to any other code in the current document. When you declare a variable within a function, it is called a  _local_  variable, because it is available only within that function.

```js
if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
  const y = 5;
}
console.log(y); // ReferenceError: y is not defined
```

## Points *var* is difference from *let*
- Variables created with  `var`  are not block-scoped, but only local to the  _function (or global scope)_  that the block resides within.	
	- Redeclaring a variable inside a block will also redeclare the variable outside the block

```js
if (true) {
	var x = 5
}

console.log(x) // 5
```

```js
if (true) {
	let y = 5
}

console.log(y) // ReferenceError: Cannot access 'y' before initialization
```

- `var` declared variables are  [hoisted](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Hoisting), meaning you can refer to the variable anywhere in its scope, even if its declaration isn't reached yet. 

```js
console.log(x); // undefined
var x = 5;
console.log(x); // 5
```
```js
console.log(y); // ReferenceError: Cannot access 'y' before initialization
let y = 5;
console.log(y);
```

## Data structures and types

### Data types

-   Primitives (immutable values represented directly at the lowest level of the language):
    1.  `Boolean` -  `true`  and  `false`
    4.  `Number` - An integer or floating point number. For example:  `42`  or  `3.14159`
    5.  `String` - A sequence of characters that represent a text value. For example:  `"Howdy"`
    2.  `null` - A special keyword denoting a null value (the intentional absence of the value)
    3.  `undefined` - A top-level property whose value is not defined (the value does not exist in the compiler)
- `Object`
- `Arrays`

### Data type conversion

JavaScript is a  _dynamically typed_  language. This means you don't have to specify the data type of a variable when you declare it. It also means that data types are automatically converted as-needed during script execution.

```
let answer = 42;
answer = "Thanks for all the fish!";
```