# Basic math in JavaScript — numbers and operators

## Types of numbers

We use different terms to describe different types of decimal numbers, for example:

-   **Integers**  are floating-point numbers without a fraction. They can either be positive or negative, e.g. 10, 400, or -5.
-   **Floating point numbers**  (floats) have decimal points and decimal places, for example 12.5, and 56.7786543.
-   **Doubles**  are a specific type of floating point number that have greater precision than standard floating point numbers (meaning that they are accurate to a greater number of decimal places).

We even have different types of number systems! Decimal is base 10 (meaning it uses 0–9 in each column), but we also have:

-   **Binary**  — The lowest level language of computers; 0s and 1s.
-   **Octal**  — Base 8, uses 0–7 in each column.
-   **Hexadecimal**  — Base 16, uses 0–9 and then a–f in each column.

Unlike some other programming languages, JavaScript only has one data type for numbers, which is  [`Number`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number). This means that whatever type of numbers you are dealing with in JavaScript, you handle them in exactly the same way.

### Useful Number methods

The  [`Number`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number) object, an instance of which represents all standard numbers you'll use in your JavaScript, has a number of useful methods available on it for you to manipulate numbers.

For example, to round your number to a fixed number of decimal places, use the  `toFixed()`  method.
```
const lotsOfDecimal = 1.766584958675746364;
console.log(lotsOfDecimal.toFixed(2)) // 1.77
```

### Converting to number data types

Sometimes you might end up with a number that is stored as a string type, which makes it difficult to perform calculations with it. There is a way to solve this problem — passing the string value into the `Number()` constructor to return a number version of the same value.

For example, try typing these lines into your console:

```js
let myNumber = "74";
myNumber += 3;
typeof myNumber;
```

To fix the calculation, you can do this:

```js
let myNumber = "74";
myNumber = Number(myNumber) + 3;
```

Note: With all other operators, JavaScript does  _not_  convert numeric values to strings. For example:

```
"37" - 7; // 30
"37" * 7; // 259
```

#### Other methods can be used to convert string into number:

-   `parseInt()`
-   `parseFloat()`

## Operators

### Arithmetic operators

- `+`
- `-`
- `*`
- `/`
- `%`
	- ex: 8 % 3 = 2
- `**`

### Operator precedence

```js
num2 + num1 / 8 + 2;
```

	Left to right. Multiply and divide are always done first, then add and subtract.

If you want to override operator precedence, you can put parentheses around the parts that you want to be explicitly dealt with first.

```js
(num2 + num1) / (8 + 2);
```

### Increment and decrement operators

- Increment/decrement varaible contains a number using `++` or `--`
- Can be used before the varaible name (`++someInt`) or after the variable name (`someInt++`)

### Assignment operators

- `=`
- `+=`
- `-=`
- `*=`
- `/=`

**Note:** There are lots of [other assignment operators available](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_operators#assignment_operators), but these are the basic ones you should learn now.

### Comparison operators

Sometimes we will want to run `true/false` tests, then act accordingly depending on the result of that test — to do this we use **comparison operators**.

- `===` - Strict equality - Tests whether the left and right values are identical to one another
- `!==` - Strict-non-equality - Tests whether the left and right values are  **not**  identical to one another
- `<` - Less than - Tests whether the left value is smaller than the right one.
- `>` - Greater than - Tests whether the left value is greater than the right one.
- `<=` - Less than or equal to - Tests whether the left value is smaller than or equal to the right one.
- `>=` - Greater than or equal to - Tests whether the left value is greater than or equal to the right one.

**Note:** You may see some people using `==` and `!=` in their tests for equality and non-equality. These are valid operators in JavaScript, but they differ from `===`/`!==`. The former versions test whether the values are the same but not whether the values' datatypes are the same. The latter, strict versions test the equality of both the values and their datatypes. The strict versions tend to result in fewer errors, so we recommend you use them.